something I've really barely talked
about on the channel is the fact that my
humanitarian work in Laos came to a
dramatic conclusion when I was kicked
out of the country
with death threats from government
officials she got into denouncing me
face to face you know standing there and
screaming me for hours as a thought
criminal as someone who was an enemy of
the Communist Party which of course I am
I mean let's face it you know unless
you're only going to recruit people to
do humanitarian work in Laos who
sincerely believe in and support
communism all of us are enemies of the
Communist Party
she was very defensive in a sense about
her her threats to kill me her threats
that me put in a gulag and my parents
would never see my corpse would never
see my remains again and so on but she
was also justifying her own threats of
violence and the violence against other
people that I presumed she'd been
implicated in herself she'd been a part
of herself in the past in that she she
said at one point that she believes the
government of Sweden did the same thing
to its own citizens all the time too
because she had lived in Sweden and she
believed that all those Western
governments whatever France America they
all did the same thing they just get
away with it but I was I was targeted
with that and frankly a kind of
compassionate and detached way because I
could see she was really suffering
she was really miserable at this very
time that she was threatening to have me
killed and saying my parents would never
get my corpse back for a funeral a lot
of details like this details about the
gulag I'd be sent to and stuff you know
but I really didn't respond to it
like a thread I could see how much she
was consumed with this sense of shame
she had probably for atrocities she's
been involved in herself but just more
generally her sense of shame for the
government she represents something I've
really barely talked about on the
channel is the fact that my humanitarian
work in Laos came to a dramatic
conclusion when I was kicked out of the
country with death threats from
government officials it's a funny story
if you tell it in a funny way it's a
really funny story and it was alluded to
on this channel a bunch of times and
then I did a really kind of low-quality
video that came out of a podcast
spontaneously that's the only telling of
the story that's on this channel and
it's one of those things where it is my
story to tell it's like I lived through
but I'm not really motivated to tell it
because it's not something that's really
that meaningful to me Melissa knows this
you know I'm Way more emotionally
burdened by for example my negative
experience with the University System
I'm really messed up with that and just
this morning I saw a YouTube channel
from another vegan who's over 100,000 US
dollars in debt student debt I think one
hundred fifty thousand US dollars in
debt you know the problems with the
university system of education they
matter to me they matter to other people
I'm still messed up in it
you mean I'm still emotionally involved
in it and professionally that's the kind
of thing where I feel you know I want to
make more videos talking about it even
now and it impacts the lives everyone
around me in this dynamic way by
contrast you know the political problems
that are peculiar to Laos very few
people understand very few people care
about and I mean I just said it can be a
really funny story I've seen people you
know crack up laughing when I tell the
story of what happened but I've also
seen people get really upset by it it
really saddened by it and those tend to
be the people who know and understand
enough about politics and Laos for
politics in Southeast Asia that they see
the larger tragedy that it's a part of
so the last couple of days really just
the last couple of days I have been
catching up with the politics of Laos
Cambodia and Thailand after several
years that being quite a low priority so
yeah compared to the average American
during the last five years I've I've
read quite a lot about the politics of
Laos Cambodia and Thailand but you know
I've been learning Chinese I was living
in Kunming I got divorced I'm spending
time in France and speaking French it's
been telling my daughter
those have been priorities mouth even
this even these stuffed animals up here
putting on puppet shows or my daughter
those have been priorities and not the
politics of Laos etc but it matters you
know I always feel it's frustration you
do sometimes talk to people who really
believe that only the politics of
Washington DC and Moscow and Beijing
matter and you can learn a tremendous
amount about politics by studying
politics of Haiti by the studying the
politics of Jamaica but right now
politics of Sudan we talked about that a
little bit you know if you think you
have nothing to learn from the way
political crises and political problems
unfold you know really all you're
talking about is politics that unfold in
a place that don't have consequences for
the rich and the famous that's what
you're talking about right yeah sure
they're um you know there could be a
massacre in Laos and it won't affect
people in Paris whereas whenever there's
a terrorist attack in Paris or New York
City it it does it impacts people in
Laos and I've been living there when
that happens it's bizarre remember
talking people in Laos about how did
they react 1 September 11th 2001
happened and so on you know I wasn't I
wasn't there then but you know I'm just
mean later
looking back on it because I asked them
I said well you know America is this
country they bombed every building in
some provinces if you're going to be
completely destroyed this country and
then how did you guys feel when instead
you know there was this terror static
United States and and then the whole
political situation changed so yeah I
remember also a comment from from an
expert really one of the only experts on
Lotion politics who said simply and
tragically the Lao people learn a great
deal by watching carefully the politics
of Thailand as they unfold and the Thai
people learn nothing by ignoring Laos
and of course for me as a Canadian I
could relate to that right away
Canadians follow American politics or
Canadians who care about politics follow
American politics and of course
Canadians learn more about their own
situation in the world
learn a lot about these important issues
by following American politics and
Americans learn nothing by ignoring
Canadian politics even the current
Bernie Sanders campaign brings that into
focus
where nail Canada's becoming a symbol of
you know the possibility of a future
America having cheap health care and
cheap university tuition providing some
of the social services Canadians day for
in I think for some Americans Canada's
also example of a country with not as
many guns we I mean in Canada people do
own guns but gun violence is very
different kind of so but yeah you're not
gonna you're not gonna learn from the
good and the bad what's gone right and
what's going on Canada by ignoring it
but any when you scale this up globally
yes part of the tragedy of the 21st
century is that everyone is paying
attention to what happens in Washington
DC and everyone is ignoring not just
Laos and Thailand and Cambodia seems
like everyone's ignoring really the vast
majority of the inhabited surface of
planet Earth it's shocking to me within
the last two years when I've been
together with Melissa I've sometimes
really been looking for any news source
on China you know it's not a smaller
obscure country and like okay there's
this one YouTube channel there's this
one podcast um there's one magazine that
has a couple of pages a month like you
know it's amazing what a low priority
even China is obviously if we were
getting involved with politics of Africa
imagine how depressing that might be so
yeah it's okay another big theme this
comes up when I talk about ecology it
came up just a couple days ago talking
to Melissa you know the ultimate
scarcity in ecology is not energy it's
not electricity it's not water it's not
sand what's most scarce of all it is the
human attention span you know human
intelligence is scarce and very often
with ecological problems that you have
to face up to is well we only have so
many people with so many hours to pay
attention to these things okay so yeah
there are many many ways in which the
politics of Laos matters I'm gonna give
one link below this video to Radio Free
Asia RFA now a Radio Free Asia is
a an indirect propaganda arm of the US
government but I'll give a link to their
page on Laos and you will see it's one
of the only english-language sources
that really tries to follow what's going
on in Laos they'll see this with
Cambodia and a few other places and
they're doing it because the United
States wants to lean on these countries
to become more democratic or have higher
standards of human rights but yeah it
doesn't pretend to be an objective
source
it's a pro-democracy probe Yuman rights
source so it's a bias you may sympathize
with but it is a biased source for for
sure anyway and but I think honestly if
you just sit there and glance at that
you'll see yeah politics of Laos matters
so look this thing happened to me I was
out doing humanitarian work in northern
Laos and I knew the rules of the game I
I was never one of these ignorant
tourists who thought there was no
political reality outside my window so I
knew I knew examples of other people
being excelled from the country
I knew examples of people being
assassinated and executed I knew
examples of people being intimidated by
quote/unquote mock executions you know
were they they act like they're gonna
kill you and then maybe they shoot the
gun just over your head and then tell
you to get out of the country these
kinds of theatrics you know and I knew
about examples of intimidation where I
sympathized with what the Lao
governments do what the Communist Party
was doing they were struggling to
control Christian missionaries you know
again I come from Canada look at what
Christian missionaries did to my country
look at what they did to the indigenous
people of the country and that's exactly
what Christian missionaries were trying
to do in Laos they were really targeting
the poor and the tribal ethnic
minorities and the illiterate and you
know trying to quote unquote save their
souls and in many ways you know
culturally assume it's culturally
similar at them in to christen them and
I could see the Communist Party
struggling with that Communist Party was
also struggling to control drugs like
opium methamphetamine at that time so
some of the use of state coercion and
violence I could sympathize with and
some
I could not but Laos was a poor
desperate post-war country and yeah I
just was never naive about what the
rules of the game were and what what the
stakes were and you know I'm just not
that self pitying about in that sense
where it's like well it what was that I
used to say to people the time worse
things have happened to nicer people I
mean I really was at the time I was
laughing and smiling about it I was very
relaxed I mean really I came
hysterically laughing you know and my
boss my boss in the humanitarian agency
he said well you're laughing now
but like you won't be left and I said to
him no I'm always gonna find this
hilarious this is always gonna be funny
to me that's always gonna be ridiculous
like you're wrong I remember saying to
him and saying in an email afterwards
saying you know ultimately you know
comedy is a force in the universe like
gravity where it doesn't it doesn't
change this is always gonna be fun
and it is it is funny and it's made even
more funny if you kind of know I mean
like you know if you were actually
performing this as a comedy um it was
the one guy doing humanitarian work who
never slept with prostitutes I was the
one guy who never drank alcohol who
never smoked drugs and like my own boss
I should want this part the white guy
who was in charge of this ultimately
Belgian Unitarian Agency my boss he was
drinking and carousing and sexual
relations with women of various kinds
which he was flagrantly exhibiting to me
he was much more of the stereotypical
permanent vacation humanitarian
professional in the back that comes and
yeah he would get I wasn't many times I
was completely sober with several times
he got drunk in front of me and started
telling me things about his sex life and
then I was amazed when I talked to and
he was so bored he didn't work he didn't
so anyway I'm surrounded by these kind
of more
Gritti these these these more corrupt
corrupted and corrupting examples of
what humanitarian work does to white men
and I'm out there completely sober with
this very obstinacy discipline life
studying the ancient Buddhist scriptures
so studying Pali Pali is an ancient
language it relates to Buddhism the way
that Latin relates to ancient Europe or
ancient Greek whatever you want to say
but that's an ancient dead language is
studying that then trying to cope with
the modern language and trying to cope
with political reality and stuff and I
was really devoted to trying to make the
best out of a bad situation allows and
actually by the way part of that story
was at a long period in Laos where I
really wasn't sure if I should commit to
humanitarian work in research in Laos
answer I'm not even getting into the
research side of it there's a lot of
research also you know book based
research as well as getting out in real
life and seeing things and then what
research is tough for another video
perhaps but I wasn't sure for one time I
should commit the Laos or if I should be
looking at moving immediately next door
to either Cambodia or Myanmar and then I
had a kind of turning point I was like
no you know what this is really
important this is worthwhile and I
should really you know take serious and
making the best of the situation allow
so do humanitarian work and research
here make the best of it and then it
wasn't it wasn't so many months later
then I was exiled from the from the
country this way so um you know part of
a humanitarian project that was there
nominally to feed starving people and I
signed up for the project on the basis
of their original mission mandate
mission statement that described that of
literally handing out sacks of rice to
starving people and they still were
doing some of that but only after I had
signed up literally after I had read
their mandate and signed the contract
was revealed to me that they changed
their mission again this shows that my
boss was really a very unethical and
somewhat stupid guy like you think this
wouldn't matter to me they had made a
transition
into agricultural development and again
I was no fool
I knew just how serious that's different
what this difference was so someone has
a bit more might naive might look at
that say oh well what's the difference
before you went into villages and you
handed out sacks of rice to starving
people and now instead you're teaching
starving people how to farm with better
farming methods better meaning white
Western European from methods better
meaning for export to Europe I'm just
saying you know better
meaning pesticides better meaning
European and American cows beef and
cattle better the concept of better
agriculture is is debatable and of
course better normally meaning the rich
get richer and the poor get poorer and
land ownership is taken away from the
poor and given to one landowner or one
corporation that's farming the cattle or
farming the Western for power there are
really deep problems this especially
when you're making a transition from
communism that had some nominal
commitment to giving lots of land to all
the poor people you know having well
that's part of the failure that's part
of the collapse of communism is handing
out land ownership to local people so
without getting into that history too
much so right away I knew whoa this is
actually a very morally murky and
conflicted situation and it was right
and they were a little bit involved also
in trying to transition away from opium
agriculture to other forms of
Agriculture so I had a hint that I was
in for a really difficult ride and I
knew also that I was going out to an
area where they still very much
literally had armed rebellion against
the government going on so there were
guerrilla fighters if you want to put it
I get out there there are a million
different anecdotes to tell but the
other big thumb addict continuity in my
life is the concern with ecology so I'm
out there I'm getting to really see the
the incredibly ethnically diverse and
linguistically diverse reality of
northern Laos going to see the
devastation of the
American War even the French war they're
still there were relics from the the war
with the French or the wars plural with
the French whatever you want to say
so as war-torn jungle landscape but the
other thing I'm seeing is the jungle
being erased from the map step by step
so when I was up there I was living in
complete immersion in the Lao language
there wasn't a single other white man in
any of those towns where the
humanitarian work and I'm speaking and
hearing the loud language every day so
you really notice more when in your
internal wedding your thoughts your
internal monologue you switch from
lotion into English you know we're
thinking in English is supposed to the
ocean and I remember in one of the
villages I looked at the horizon where
there was a stark line between the
intact intact forests or forests of some
kind jungle on the hillside and then
this total deforestation just you know
where there's just nothing there not it
wasn't being replaced with crops
I mean cut down and I thought to myself
in English huh a bet you can see day by
day week by week how the line moves how
you move this this valley this jungle
Valley gets turned into a desertified
Valley
what if you want to say I remember I
thought that and a few days later I had
the same walk through town with the same
view and I actually felt emotionally
devastated I didn't I didn't weep but I
was really shocked hurt because it was
literally true I could see that the line
had moved I could see that day by day I
was watching the progress of
deforestation and I met and talked with
people
melissa's heard this before I I said to
people things like they they had just
killed the last Tigers in that province
of Laos I was doing humanitarian work
there were two tigers left one male one
female and then went out and killed them
and you know the justification was
Tigers eat people so of course after
they killed the Tigers they sold the the
corpse for money to a Chinese
businessman of course and you know I I
asked the question this is my motive
speaking Lao
how many people did Tigers kill this
year of course they don't know all
theirs
the answer is probably zero well it's in
any given year the number is either zero
or one but you know if there aren't
there aren't any Tigers anymore and I
pointed the motorcycle and I said how
many people did motorcycles kill this
year why don't you kill all the
motorcycles you know instead of killing
all the Tigers so there was this all
these different really kind of
meaningful thematic elements the
indigenous people and the indigenous
languages and the jungle disappearing
the last of many wild species large wild
species being hunted to extinction
tigers elephants I didn't see it
happening to the elephants myself that
I've read about you know what you care
about it
giant pythons and what-have-you this is
all going on and the reality is my own
humanitarian agency in reality sorry use
reality twice that's in reality a home
it had it had been on a downward
slippery slope from doing very legit
very direct humanitarian work to doin
quite a number of things I consider
illegitimate immoral and in many ways
harmful to the the local people to their
short-term and long-term future so there
was a lot to learn and I'm out there
living for you know kind of 29 days a
month 29 or 30 days a month not quite
the whole month in these remote villages
where you know there very few foreigners
ever go ever have been and so on
with all this have even said about the
context that was indeed meaningful to me
um the peculiar anecdote the brains that
alter dramatic ending is relatively
meaningless I've said before that I was
laughing and really quite relaxed and
enjoyed that bizarre circumstances of my
exile but by contrast what I wept over
literally wept over was throwing my
dictionary in the garbage was of seeing
how many thousands of hours of hard work
I'd put into lotion language and poly
and Link languages and you know I did
literally have to give away my my
dictionaries my books I couldn't carry
them with me and knowing would that
represent it that all that hard work in
a very real sense was for nothing and of
course all the hard work studying the
history and Paula
history of Buddhism and stone
inscriptions and archaeology as well as
modern and ongoing political history
world war ii vietnam war there was all
this work invested into knowing laos and
understanding laos linked to the study
of the lao language and that was all
symbolically going in the garbage when I
threw my dictionary in the garbage so
that was that was devastating to me but
it's in the context of this very
meaningful humanitarian work that we
then have this somewhat meaningless and
bizarre anecdote at the end of it of how
I got kicked out so I'm in one of these
remote villages doing humanitarian work
and a woman arrives who's a
representative of the Lao government and
she was out there as part of US funded
drug control efforts I'm sorry she had
done projects and she was doing projects
with the United States government but I
think the specific task she was on at
that time was linked to UNODC the United
Nations Drug Control Agency in any case
her whole career this woman she had been
to Sweden and studied in got a
university degree she'd spent time in
Europe various Western countries her
whole life was a series of government
junkets and her current one at the time
I met her was going on to these remote
villages to examine and report back on
especially methamphetamine use what was
going on in in the drug scene so she
spoke English that's was the language
she'd learned and practiced while she
was in Sweden so she spoke English with
me and at first for several days
she was trying very hard to be my best
friend in the world and she was pushing
me to help write for her to go straight
for her a letter to the American Embassy
she was actually writing and trying to
get the American Embassy to pay for her
to do yet another junket so she could go
visit I think was Los Angeles so she's
complete waste of taxpayers money but
this was her whole life I mean she was a
career bureaucrat in communist Laos and
I mean I guess could give her credit for
saying she was wasting the money of
Western countries rather own taxpayers
but this is really what her life
was devoted to so for several days she
and I got along just fine and then her
mood twisted and really for no good
reason
she got into denouncing me face to face
you know standing there and screaming me
for hours as a thought criminal as
someone who was an enemy of the
Communist Party
which of course I am I mean let's face
it
you know unless you're only going to
recruit people to do humanitarian work
in Laos who sincerely believed in it
support communism all of us are enemies
of the Communist Party and none of us
are part of their ideology or their
their religion however you want to put
it I always thought it was significant
to what happens in the rest of the story
that while she was denouncing me this
way the other staff at this remote
station it's not worth described and it
was a really beautiful and memorable
setting really bizarre setting kind of
on the edge of civilization on the edge
of the jungle but we're in this wicker
hut on stilts you know bamboo hut on
stilts and the other members of staff
who were all kind of ethnic minority
born poor or tribal people people who
didn't speak loshon as the first
language fit for example there was one
guy sitting there who was Hmong HM Ong
but another guy was Camus these are the
ethnic minorities of Thailand Laos
so that and there's a real racial divide
there between lowland Lotion people and
the Highland ethnic minorities these
other people were sitting around and
laughing at her so I actually wasn't you
know laughing at her in that sense I
wasn't scorning her I had quite a
surreal conversation with her about
communism and her career and I was in a
kind of detached and relaxed way I was
responding to her threats to kill me
which she was going on at great length
about by really talking to her about mmm
communism because my own parents had
been communists I grew up with communism
and rejected it and her life and how she
sees the current government of Laos and
how she sees it in contrast to
government's in Europe living in places
like Sweden so to give an illustration
at one point she was very defensive in a
sense about her
threats to kill me for threats Stephanie
put in a gulag and my parents would
never see my corpse would never see my
remains again and so on but she was also
justifying her own threats of violence
and the violence against other people
that I presumed she'd been implicated in
herself she'd been a part of herself in
the past in that she she said at one
point that she believes the government
of Sweden did the same thing to its own
citizens all the time too because she
had lived in Sweden and she believed
that all those Western governments
whatever France America they all did the
same thing they just get away with it
like you don't hear about it something
and you can imagine that led to a really
interesting conversation between her and
I was like no like this is really
different look you know this is actually
a big difference between countries like
whether or not you get a trial whether
or not you're innocent between whether
or not you're innocent till proven
guilty or whether you just disappear
when the Communist Party decides to
abduct you and so on no no no this is
really a difference between Sweden and
laughs the quality of law and order and
Sweden and so no the you know the quote
the Swedish Communist Party is not doing
this to people nor the nor the Swedish
government that this was really a big
difference but I was I was targeted with
that and frankly a kind of compassionate
and detached way because I could see she
was really suffering
she was really miserable at this very
time that she was threatening to have me
killed and saying my parents would never
get my corpse back for a funeral a lot
of details like this details about the
gulag I'd be sent to and stuff you know
but I really didn't respond to it like a
thread I could see how much she was
consumed with this sense of shame she
had probably for atrocities she's been
involved in herself but just more
generally her sense of shame for the
government she represents the system of
government she represents in contrast to
exactly places like like Sweden and the
United States we have you so yeah it was
it was an interesting and truly bizarre
and surreal conversation that went on
and on for ages and again these other
people and the staff or sitting around
laughing at her
they just thought she was completely
ridiculous sir he'd give one other
example really briefly another part of
conversation that was strange and
memorable and again in the midst of her
making these these threats to me
she started insisting that Laos was not
a communist country that foreigners
didn't understand that that Laos was
ruled by the People's Revolutionary
Party and that they were not technically
communist and you know I really
responded with kind of Socratic method
and you know I asked her you know okay
so we you know you have elections here
in Laos right right how many political
parties are there in the elections one
elections look you know but really with
Socratic method I was saying to her like
okay so in what sense do you think
you're not a communist country look what
you know what do you mean by this
but I really didn't you know I didn't
respond to it by with fear and I didn't
respond to it by protesting my my
innocence or what-have-you but as always
the people who really suffer are not the
white Western humanitarian aid workers
it was my co-workers so the local lotion
people again whether the ethnic minority
or not Camus akka whatever they were
they were taken in and interrogated and
had to stand in front of portraits of
Lenin and Karl Marx and denounced me as
a thought criminal and had to apologize
to the Communist Party for the fact that
they hadn't you know reported me earlier
and you know the punchline to it all is
what was the basis for me being
denounced and I don't think any of them
ended up in prison but probably all them
had a black mark next to the name for
the rest of their lives and you know
they were on the bad list of the
Communist Party whatever consequences
that had for them in the comment system
what was it that led to all of this it
was the name that I gave to one of our
cats can't say it was my cat we had cats
up there to try to keep the rats away
and I always asked them I said why don't
you give them names and I gave the cats
names of people I respect it if people
positive I named one of the cats after
the Minister of ecology because I really
respected him it was the only person I
knew in the Lao government at that time
who was standing up for standing up
against deforestation saying this is a
real problem we need to have a zero
cutting policy in national parks and
this kind of thing it was out of respect
for him that I named my my cat after he
was one of the only people in the Lao
government I really liked and she
insisted on interpreting that as an
insult to the Communist Party and I said
to her you know in the West you know
when we name an animal after somebody
it's like naming a boat after somebody
you know we talked about this at some
length and there were other examples and
this is another reason what the other
people were just laughing at her they
just thought her argument was ridiculous
like they just thought it was completely
ridiculous the idea that this was an
insult to the Communist Party it's just
in that she was gonna kill me for the
name of my cat it would tug to normal
allow people even a normal Communist
Party apparatchik
it just seemed laugh-out-loud funny and
you know I guess they were laughing
until the day they were taken in and and
interrogated and in terms of how bad
that interrogation was I mean I never
got to meet any of those people face to
face again but they were probably pretty
cynical well-informed people who knew
who knew how to be interrogated I
remember when I came back to the town
the employees at one of the small hotels
I used to stand this is in between
villages stay in a small hotel for there
too they were terrified they were
terrified to see me and of course I soon
figured out why that was even they have
been taken in and Tara gated by the
Communist Party just because they
changed the bed sheets on the bed wide
slept but I mean that is part of the
mania of communism is that the country
can never be pure enough it can never be
cleansed of those bourgeois impulses
because what they call bourgeois
what we would call human nature Danton
[Music]